---
layout: page
title: Collecting
---

## Collecting Methods

Collecting methods are too varied to cover in detail, but we will demonstrate a
number of them during the field excursion.  In nearshore environments in Florida
much of the habitat consists of sand, silt or mud.  In these areas most animals
live buried, and need to be exposed by digging/sieving.  Hard bottoms, like
jetties, oyster reefs, or mangrove roots, offer home to other species.  Seagrass
beds hold many species that can be collected by a net run through the grass bed.
Initial collecting for learning and documenting what species occur in an area is
best done qualitatively, i.e. without worrying about documenting the abundance
and local distribution of various species.  Once the species are well-enough
known, quantitative studies of communities can also be pursued.

It is useful to keep animals that mess each other up in separate containers
after collecting.  Some mollusks slime (that’s no big deal to other mollusks,
but can really foul a crab), crabs rip, many sea slugs and flatworms emit toxins
that kill other organisms confined in the same container.  The two biggest
enemies of collected animals in confined containers are lack of oxygen and heat.
It is best to keep few organisms per container and make sure there is ample air
space above - animals in a closed jar filled with water to the top will quickly
use up all the oxygen and suffocate.

## Specimen processing

There are three main components to thoroughly documenting collected animals:
photography, subsampling, and voucher preparation.

1) A collecting event at a certain place and time, usually from a specific
habitat, is assigned a Station Number (ex: AMB-St-005).  This number is recorded
with all its requisite information on the back of a pre-printed field sheet (see
attached “field sheet”) and possibly in the spreadsheet which is saved on the
computer (see attached “spreadsheet”).  The Station Number links to information
about the collection site:

A.  Location description (country, state, city, island, address, name of
location, description of how to find site).  EX: Djibouti, Moucha Islands, ridge
off Maskali Island

B.  Date of collection

C.  Collector(s)

D.  Latitude / Longitude

E. Depth (or altitude)

F.  Habitat

2) When coming in from the field, animals from the same Station are initially
kept together, a label with the station number is added to their container for
tracking, and are then sorted to morphospecies.  Each morphospecies gets a
pre-printed label containing the Field Number (ex: FLAR-004).  There are two
copies of each Field Number on each label (one for specimen voucher, one for
tissue sample for DNA) and they match the numbers on the printed field sheet.


3) As a specimen is sorted for processing its information is entered next to its
assigned field number on the sheet.  This information includes:

A.  Station Number

B.  Taxon

C.  Fixative to be used.

D.  Whether the specimen will be photoed (and any relevant notes, ex: in situ
photo)

E.  Whether the specimen will be subsampled.

F.  Number of specimens associated with that field number (if more than 1)

G.  Microhabitat

H.  General notes

4) The specimen then moves on to the photo area along with both copies of its
field number tag.  The first photo of the specimen includes at least part of the
animal and all of the field label.  This enables easy subsequent matching of
photos with specimens, and also provides a scale if the printed field number is
of a standard size.  The photos following the photo of the field number all go
with that number.

5) After photography (or if the animal is not going to be photographed) the
specimen and its pair of Field Labels moves on to the
relaxation/subsample/fixation area.  Animals are anesthetized according to their
phylum and/or taxon (different relaxants work on different groups).

6) Once the animal is thoroughly relaxed a subsample is taken (if applicable)
and placed in a small (2 mL) plastic, “DNA” vial filled with 95-100% ethanol.
One copy of the Field Label goes into the small vial with the subsample.  This
allows us to match the subsample with the voucher back at FLMNH.

7) The animal (voucher), along with the remaining copy of the Field Label goes
into the fixative appropriate for that group.  If no subsample was taken, both
copies of the Field Label will go into the vial with the voucher.  This is a
further check as to whether or not a subsample was taken in the field.

8) As the field sheets are filled, photos or copies of it are made for backup.

9) After field work the field sheets are transcribed into the spreadsheet
provided.

## Photography

Some animals are best photod in the field, others, especially small, mobile
ones, are easiest to photograph in the lab.  For lab photography use a small
aquarium, with just enough water to cover animal.  A black background (velvet,
felt) placed under the aquarium gives an even background (we will discuss tricks
of getting this especially even).  The field label, and a scale, gray card,
color card, are useful to photograph with the subject in the first photo.  If
the animal moves too rapidly to photograph it can be anesthetized or killed
prior to photography.

Point and shoot cameras need to be set to macro mode.  Flashes on these often
give uneven lighting at close range, so if you use them try to get other
lighting sources (natural light, strong LED, etc).  SLR cameras with macro
lenses are ideal for photographing small animals, especially when combined with
flashes.  If you shoot with SLR, synchronize the flashes, and set the f-stop
around 16-20.  Lower f-stops give less depth of field, while higher f-stops lead
to low resolution, the 16-20 range is a sweet spot of compromise.  We like to
manually focus when photographing with SLR, as most auto-focus functions are not
sufficiently responsive.  Make sure you select the approriate white balance and
high resolution, low compression.

## Anesthetization

Several anesthetics are commonly used with marine animals:

- **Magnesium chloride** (MgCl<sub>2</sub>): prepared in fresh water at 7.5
weight % (75 gr of MgCl<sub>2</sub> hexahydrate to 1 L water), so that it is isoosmotic with
seawater.  It is gradually added to seawater, typically for a final 50-50
concentration.  Mg replacing Ca in muscles and nerves paralyzing the animal.
MgCl<sub>2</sub> works well with most marine invertebrates: worms, mollusks, anemones,
echinoderms, etc.

- **Clove oil** a few drops mixed up in sea water, then this murky
solution added to a bowl with animals works great on crustaceans especially.

- **Menthol** add to dish with animals by either sprinkling crushed crystals on
top or adding drops of concentrated menthol solution prepared in ethanol.
Menthol works especially well for cnidarians and ascidians.  Even better, add
menthol on top of dish of MgCl<sub>2</sub> solution – works very well for such
difficult to relax animals like sea cucumbers.

- **Cooling / freezing** : Prevents autotomization in many and is a relatively
humane way of killing animals, but will not commonly lead to expansion of
contracted animals.  Great for crabs.

## Fixation

The purpose of fixation is to fix tissues for long-term storage and study.
Formalin or similar fixatives are necessary for quality fixation and for most
groups where detailed anatomy or histology is desired, but formalin makes DNA
extraction very difficult at best.  Ethanol is fine as a fixative for groups
where only external characters or gross anatomical features are used in taxonomy
(e.g. most crustaceans and sponges), is more pleasant and less hazardous to work
with, and DNA can be extracted from the specimen.  For all specimens it is ideal
to take a small tissue sample fixed separately for DNA extraction, but this is
especially important for samples that get fixed in formalin.

When fixing large animal (such as a large sea cucumber, sponge, soft coral) in
ethanol, it is best to use 95% ethanol to counteract the water content of the
animal - you can eyeball.  You should always use enough fixative - at least 3X
volume of specimen, to make sure that the final concentration of fixative is
adequate (70% for ethanol, 5-10% for formalin).  For larger animals (>5 cm in
all dimensions) it is important to make sure the fixative penetrates, by
injecting or cutting them open.

Formalin: used generally at 5-10% strength of the industrial “formalin” solution
(itself 38% formaldehyde gas dissolved in water).  Thus 10% “formalin” is 3.8%
formaldehyde.  For marine life, mix formalin with sea water; for freshwater
animals mix with freshwater.  For any group with calcareous parts buffer
formalin, as the liquid turns acidic (formic acid) with age.  Buffering can be
done with fine CaCO3 powder or a pinch of borax.

Ethanol: Bulk alcohol usually comes at 95% concentration.  We use 75% ethanol
for routine fixation, 95% for routine bulk genetic fixation, and 95-100% for
fixing small genetic subsamples.  Mix ethanol with distilled/deionized/soft
water to dilute it.  Methanol is not good for fixation; isopropyl is OK, but not
optimal.

The following groups need formalin for proper fixation: algae (if
fixed wet), anemones, worms, cephalopods, ascidians, fish.

The following groups should be fixed in alcohol: sponges, cnidarians other than
anemones, mollusks, crustaceans, echinoderms

## Subsampling

Subsampling is useful because you get better DNA preservation in small tissue
pieces than in larger, whole specimens, and because it allows samples to be
stored in freezers, where DNA quality remains high.  A tissue sample should be
<1-2 mm across to allow penetration of alcohol.  Little tissue is needed to get
DNA, but it is useful to have a couple of these pieces to allow repeated DNA
extractions.  To take a subsample, slice off a small piece of the animal (end of
foot in a gastropod, tube foot from a sea star) with a scalpel or razer, and
place it directly into 95-100% ethanol in a subsample vial.  Makes sure there is
10X the volume of ethanol to fix the sample.  With small animals or those that
deteriorate rapidly (sponges, flatworms, etc) it is important to fix a subsample
(or the sample) before, or quickly after death as DNA can deteriorate rapidly.
Robust animals (e.g. fish, mollusks) however yield quality DNA many hours after
death.Information about collecting
