---
layout: page
title: Introduction: What are species?
---

## What are species?

A lot of ink has been spilled about what species are, but for animals in a given
area this is not a difficult question: species are individuals that recognize
each other as conspecifics and thus exchange genes through reproduction.
Different species are delineated by lack of gene flow – no, very little, or
unsuccessful exchange of genes between species (hybridization).  Within species,
DNA is mixed up each generation through sexual reproduction, but remains
separate from other pools of DNA in other species.  As a result, when we look at
the relationship of individuals to each other in a phylogenetic tree,
individuals within species differ little, whereas individuals from other species
differ substantially:

A lack of gene flow and divergent evolution of genomes means that species end up
differing in phenotype as well, sooner or later.  However there is a catch – it
may be sooner or later.  When there is selection favoring different phenotypes –
for ecological or reproductive reasons, for example – then morphologic
divergence happens sooner. When there is no selection, or there is stabilizing
selection favoring the current phenotype, then morphological divergence happens
later.

Mate recognition is important for each species; it is how individuals within one
species decide to exchange genes with each other rather than with individuals
from another species.  For animals like many vertebrates, visual cues can be
very important in mate recognition, thus there is a strong tendency for species
to look different.  As vertebrates, we are used to this, and expect species to
look different. However, this does not have to be the case; mate recognition can
be accomplished through other sensory pathways.  Thus fish crows and American
crows, species that are very difficult to distinguish visually, have very
different calls – mate recognition is through sound.  In the ocean, light can be
limiting, and many marine animals have poorly developed vision.  For this
reason, chemical communication for mate recognition is often the dominant mode
in marine invertebrates.

It is, therefore, not surprising that we are finding that many “good species” –
i.e. species whose DNA shows that they are distinct from each other – are not
easily distinguished based on their appearance.  These are called cryptic
species.  Cryptic species are turning out to be very common in the sea, and many
common marine organisms are now being recognized as complexes of similar
species.  A major challenge for taxonomists of the coming decades is to tease
out and characterize this cryptic diversity.  Nevertheless, most species are
identifiable visually, and even cryptic species discovered through DNA
sequencing often turn out to be visually distinguishable when studied closely
and guided by DNA sequence data.


## Biodiversity at the Species Level

While species (when properly delineated) are natural units, other taxonomic
categories (subspecies, genera, families, etc.) are arbitrary human constructs.
Hierarchical classifications in part reflect the philosophical views and
taxonomic opinions of the time.  Much of our knowledge about biodiversity is
based on species occurrence data: where and when a particular species was
documented to occur.  Knowing the natural world that surrounds you begins with
identifying the relevant players.  A good exercise for any naturalist – or group
of students – is to sort out and identify the species that live in the area.  If
we all did this for the coastal zone in Florida, we would rapidly get a very
useful field guide for the marine biota, including a distribution map of
component species.  This would be an extremely useful outcome of a statewide
student and citizen science effort.

Occurrence records are records of a species in a particular place and time.
Minimally they consist of a location (latitude / longitude), time, and
identification.  Occurrence records can be based on expert observations,
photographs, specimens, DNA sequences, and other types of records.  Several
organizations are drawing together occurrence records from many sources to
provide global overviews of the distribution of species.  Check out the
following resources: GBIF, OBIS, Map of Life, Discover Life (see links in
Appendix IV).
